
= ActiveSheet

Spreadsheets. You hate them. Your customers love them. 

Most customer projects involve one or more of those tedious "just import data from a spreadsheet" tasks.
Those not-so-quick-but-surely-dirty scripts always end up being clunky and full of kludges.

Enough juggling with arrays, hashes, counting indices and cleaning up all that garbage thrown at you in 
order to make it fit in your bulletproof model chock-full of well tested validations.

ActiveSheet is a small a Ruby DSL to help you declaratively take care of the most boring part of the 
processing.  It will parse, sanitize, filter your incoming data and present it back to you in clean objects which are so much pleasant to work with!

Just like Active Record, it maps each row of the spreadsheet file to an object.  It supports both auto-discovery or explicit declarations of the columns.  Take a look at the examples below...

== Usage

=== Column Mapping

ActiveSheet requires the mapping of the spreadsheet columns to attribute names.  You can do it manually in various way.

  class Person < ActiveSheet::Base

    # Will skip the first row in the file
    skip_header
    
    # String by default
    columns :firstname, :lastname, :date_of_birth, :height, :weight
    
  end

  people = Person.load('/path/to/people.csv')
  people.first
  # => #<Person:0x384898 @date_of_birth="1985-08-01", @lastname="Doe", @weight="85.4", @firstname="John", @height="178", @line_number=1>
  people.first.firstname
  # => "John"
  people.first.height
  # => "178" # String

You can also declare one column at a time, and provide a target type.  ActiveSheet will take care of the conversions for you.
   
  class Person < ActiveSheet::Base

    column [:firstname, :lastname], :string
    column :date_of_birth, :date
    column :height, :integer
    column :weight, :float

  end

  people = Person.load('/path/to/people.csv')
  people.first
  # #<Person2:0x383754 @date_of_birth=#<Date: 4892557/2,0,2299161>, @lastname="Doe", @weight=85.4, @firstname="John", @height=178, @line_number=1>
  people.first.firstname
  # => "John"
  people.first.height
  # => 178 # Fixnum

=== Row Objects

You can access the attributes of row objects but by accessor or using []:

   person.firstname == person[:firstname]

You can also get all the attributes in a hash, which can be convinient if you want to populate an ActiveRecord model for instance:

   person.attributes # => {:firstname => "John", :lastname => "Doe", ...}

An additional instance variable <tt>line_number</tt> is also set by the processor so you can keep track of the originating row in the source document.

=== Column Autodiscovery

ActiveSheet supports column autodiscovery.  It will read the first row to read the column headers and transform each label into a symbol.
By default, all values will be returned as strings which is not that useful.  You can provide some hints to help ActiveSheet to set the right type or give the column a better name:


  class Person < ActiveSheet::Base
  
    discover_columns "Lastname" => :surname,                    # Will map column heading "lastname" to :surname
                     "date of birth" => [:birthdate, :date],    # "date of birth" will be named :birthdate and converted into a Date
                     :height => :integer                        # Type hint for the inflected column name :height
                     :weight => :float                          # Type hint for the inflected column name :weight

  end

=== Dealing With Garbage

Most spreadsheets are authored by humans and most of them suck at sticking to conventions.

ActiveSheet allows you to customize the definition of a blank cell, people are very creative when it comes to expressing void.  You can customize this either with a regular expression or a block

  class Person < ActiveSheet::Base

    # Cells containing "xxxxx" or "-" are empty
    blank_cell /^xx+|\-$/
    
  end

  class Person < ActiveSheet::Base

    # Treat "N/A" cells as empty
    blank_cell do |s|
      (s.size == 0) || (s == "N/A")
    end
    
  end

You may also find yourself cleaning up cell contents to be able to convert it to some usable format, ActiveSheet also comes in handy:

  class Payment < ActiveSheet::Base
    
    discover_columns :money_us => :decimal, :money_eur => :decimal
    
    blank_cell %r{^(\#+|\-)$}
    
    # "1,000,000.00 USD"
    sanitize :money_us do |s| s.gsub(/[^\d\.]/, '') end
    
    # "EUR 2.000.000,00"
    sanitize :money_eur do |s| s.gsub(/[^\d,]/, '').tr(',', '.') end
    
  end
  
=== Skipping and Filtering Rows

In addition to <tt>skip_header</tt>, you can also declare when to start/stop processing the file

  class Person < ActiveSheet::Base

    discover_columns
  
    start_at_row   5
    stop_after_row 180
    
  end

You can also define row filtering code both before and after the conversion of the row into an object.

  class TemperatureRecord < ActiveSheet::Base
    
    column :place
    column :temperature, :float
    
    # Source row is an array of strings as returned by the parser
    filter_source_row do |source_row|
      source_row.empty? || row.first.nil?
    end
  
    # Here the row is an object for which attributes were converted
    filter_row do |row|
      row.temperature < 25
    end
    
  end
  
  
== MIT License

Copyright (c) 2009 Xavier Defrang

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person
obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation
files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without
restriction, including without limitation the rights to use,
copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the
Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following
conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES
OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT
HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY,
WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
